We have a complaint here against you that you're
going to have a closed court against the Fort
Jackson Five, and I said, that's exactly right. I
said, I thought all you people in Washington knew
that. Well, they said, well, Secretary of Defense
and Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public
Affairs feels that it should be opened. I said, I
guess you misunderstood me. I said, the court is
closed, and if you want it open, you get yourself
another boy down here to command this place.
That's what you told him? That's what I told him. Of
course, that was going back to the Secretary of
Defense. That went back to the Secretary of
Defense. The court remained closed.
Well... They were all found guilty. Of what
charge? For disrupting the military operations
and for anti-communist activities within the
armed forces. I mean for communist activities.
Anti-American activities. Anti-American
activities, yeah. And there were eight or ten
charges on there. I don't remember now what it was.
defiance of rules and standing order and
regulation, misconduct, and so on and so forth
like that in public places. And they were found
guilty and given undesirable discharge or
dishonorable discharges depending on the
seriousness of each individual. And then they
turned around and sued me in the federal courts for
denying their rights on the First Amendment. And
the Secretary of the Army and I were tried And this
is the first case we tried in the federal courts. I
was tried in the federal court along with the
Secretary of the Army. And a federal court ruled
that you could not operate a military force as a
common ordinary
civilian organization. from the standpoint of
discipline and authority of the
commander-in-chief,
and that we were, the Secretary of the Army and I,
were acquitted. And they appealed that. And we got
a two-to-one vote in our favor in the Fourth
Circuit Court in Richmond. And that was over with,
and those guys were out. And believe it or not, one
went to Massachusetts and ran for the Congress up
there under the Socialist Workers Party and the
head leader stayed in Georgia and ran for the
Congress under the Social Workers Party of the
First District of Washington. But that was an
episode in my life where, you know,
have got to stand up to what you believe in and be
damned what the intent of your superiors might be
from the standpoint of interfering with your
responsibilities which you've been assigned to
and by God when they do they either they either get
in my view get somebody else to do the damn job or
leave you alone. And they left me alone.
But it set the example. The case set the example for
the rest of the United States during this critical
period of communist disruption and burning of
buildings and total destruction, anarchy within
a democracy. That's a hell of a thing to happen in a
democracy, isn't it? God damn. Did you have any
other examples of disorderly conduct? Out of the
ordinary disorderly conduct?
Oh. Or for the most part were they just the usual or
the usual routine sort of thing?
Nothing uncommon to everyday life. Did you ever,
with these Fort Jackson Five, did you ever have any
talks or discussion with them? No, no. Did you ever
interview them? No, God no. Ask them what they were
doing or why? No, no, no. Weren't you curious?
Well, you get all that information anyway. You got
ways and means of finding out all this
information, you know.
So you don't need to talk to them. You just don't,
you never want to give a communist element the
privilege
of, of being honored with your presence, you see.
So, that,
You'd be surprised how many congressmen, how much
support from the Congress you can get from a
communist element in this country. What do you
mean? A congressman writing you and saying, what
are you doing to this fine young man? We've just
heard that you locked up this fine young man.
What's the matter with you? And what they're
talking about is they're supporting a commie.
See? And you say, well Jesus Christ, how in the hell
can the people elect a joker like that to represent
them in the United States Congress? Through
ignorance? He was ignorant in the first place. He
really didn't intend to support communism.
Sometimes you feel like that they do, but I don't
think they do.
But it's the sort of thing that, that's the reason I
asked you yesterday about what we had found at A&M
back some time ago, what the indications were.
Well, you left there in 1970 and you went up to
command the entire Army in Alaska. What are the
responsibilities up there? Responsibilities
are to command about a division of, at that time,
about a division of Arctic trained soldiers and
Eskimo scouts. with intelligence activities
scattered along that part of the front, along the
barren straits, and to provide external security
and support to internal police forces, and to
train the soldiers in the art of winter warfare,
skiing,
glacier training on glacier ice, movement on the
glaciers, mountain climbing, arctic scouting,
the art of scouting, parachuting in toward the
North Pole, and survival and recovery, and the use
of helicopters and snowmobiles and other types of
equipment. and most of your training you wait
until the weather is minus fifty degrees for your
winter exercises and you work very closely with
the Canadian military and you exchange units back
and forth. The exercise that I had during the
winter of 1970 was for about six weeks in which I had
a commando regiment airborne commando regiment
out of Canada joined us. I had about five thousand
in the exercise. They sent me about fifteen
hundred and we were to experiment with the use of
helicopters in air mobile operations during the
heavy winter and the temperature had to be minus
fifty to minus seventy-five in order for us to and
we learned a tremendous amount about cold soaking
of vehicles. We know that we only, at those
temperatures, we only get about 10 minutes of work
per hour out of a soldier. We know that we have a high
number of casualties because you can't get them to
go urinate or defecate because flesh burns, third
degree burns, in 30 seconds at that temperature.
We know that if you cut your helicopter off, it'll
cold soak in 15 minutes to the point it'll take you
two hours with Herman Nelson heaters in order to
get it to where it'll start again. So you never turn
off the engine, you see, helicopter engine, when
you're flying out in the field. We know that the
commanding general designed his own uniform.
That's me in the uniform Wade less than four pounds
while he survived at minus 75. The soldiers had to
have 96 pounds of clothing on to survive at that
temperature. Why? Was it a different material?
Yes, totally different material. I designed this
uniform. It was a two-piece form-fitting
goose-down underwear. with zippers all over the
place so you know you can without taking it off and
without exposure. Followed by a wind-resistant
piece of cloth that was finally found of a tins
line, a tins line which is real hard, waterproof,
windproof, and that in the form of a one-piece
coverall again lined with with goose down on the
inside.
The result of that is you find today a product
called Gore-Tex, G-R-E-T-E-X, okay? Yeah, by
Gorman. Yeah. No, wait a minute. What's the guy's
name? His name is Gore, isn't it? Yeah, yeah. So,
it's Gore-Tex. That's the forerunner of this
uniform I had. Gore-Tex is a waterproof Yeah,
that's right. And hard as hell. You can't cut it
with a knife. And then I had a same sort of headgear
with wolf fur on the outside, which would not
permit
snow to melt on my face. I
was able to negotiate
with just a small amount of weight. Well, the
problem resolved itself around the fact that you
can't get enough goose down to equip a division of
troops. It just isn't available, and I put the
Natick Laboratories up in Massachusetts
requirement on them to come up with the material to
replace goose down. It's my understanding that
they've been able to do that now, but it's been one
hell of an expensive proposition to try to come up
with a synthetic that produces the same warmth
capability, protection capability as goose
down. Is that how we got things like hollow film?
Yes, yes, yes. Those are all the requirements.
originated out of those exercises over the years,
not only that one but others.
Probably the most effective vehicle for moving
across the snow is a surface effects vehicle.
Surface effects vehicle, as you know. That's a
vehicle that operates on air cushion. Yeah, on air
cushion. Helicopters, we found, created
snowstorms. We'd be able to set down a piece of
artillery The normal procedure is to sit down next
to it and let the 15 men off it and the ammunition
that's going to run that artillery piece. But in
letting the ammunition bag under the artillery
piece that slung down under the helicopter on the
ground, it created such a snowstorm that the
helicopter had to fly away and wait until the storm
subsided before he could come back and create
another storm, but go ahead and sit down and let the
men out. So we learned a tremendous amount of what
you need to do. One thing we know that we have to do if
we're going to have that kind of operations in
Alaska in the snow, we know that we have to go
stabilize the snow. How do you do that? Well, you
spray it with a chemical. and stabilize the snow so
you can sit down without creating these clouds. Of
course, if you're doing this operation near the
enemy, you're tipping your hand because he can see
the snow clouds that you're creating.
I would say that 10% at temperatures of minus 50 to
minus 75 Ten percent of the effort is fighting and
ninety percent is survival. That's just what I
would think. I would think that the probability of
ever having battle in that type of atmosphere
would be really slim unless we were talking about—
Particularly ground action. Yeah, exactly. I
think you'd have to concentrate primarily on air
capability.
Was this aimed toward Siberia? Well, this is aimed
toward defending ourselves against attacks from
Siberia across the Bering Strait.
Tell me about relations of the Canadians and the
quality of their troops and officers. Their
troops and officers are very, very high quality.
As a matter of fact, this particular regiment had
two squadrons. Instead of saying battalions,
they were talking about squadrons. And one was
French and one was English.
High order of professionalism, very high order of
professionalism. And this particular regiment
trades off every three years from an English
regimental commander to a French-speaking
regimental commander. Well, this regiment had a
lot of capability for insurgency, for scouting,
for operations behind lines, supporting people
on the flanks, for internal security purposes.
It's a tremendous capability to have in that one
regiment. But they are not unlike other armies in
the world who have less responsibility in the
world than the United States. They have so very
few, so little strength, but what they have is
number one first class in my view, and they've got
some top-notch officers. I have been to school
with their officers, and I have great admiration
and respect for them. In fact, they just I'd be
willing to fight under their command or along
beside them or in front of them or behind them or
wherever you say, anytime, anyplace in the world.
That's how good they are. And they have a brigade in
Europe at a part of their NATO commitment. And I had
visited that unit in 1976
and they had one of the finance brigade commanders
there was in Europe. He was just totally
outstanding, along with all of his subordinates.
So I can't speak with nothing but praise and
admiration for Canadian forces, but they're
awfully small and they don't have very much.
I suppose it's gets back to money and it also gets
back to what do they need to take care of themselves
when they got a United States down south that's
damn sure not going to interfere with what they're
doing. Now you were controversial when you were
down in South Carolina Do you think that they moved
you all the way up to Alaska to put you on ice, so to
speak?
Maybe so, but I inherited another situation in
Alaska which I spent many months cleaning out. Oh,
well what was that? The Mafia, the civilian Mafia
had penetrated the aviation supply company
Fairbanks. And they were stealing off, with the
assistance of some of the military personnel,
thousands and thousands of dollars worth of
supplies. Really? Yeah. How'd you find out about
this? Well, this stuff is showing up all over the
place, the country. U.S. Army equipment is
showing up in places it shouldn't be showing up. Oh
yeah, that's right. And so, with the aid of a little
help from Washington,
I called for some
fifteen army auditors, special army auditors,
And about the same number of agents, trained
agents, I was able to penetrate this business.
Cleaned it out. Some of the mafia started killing
themselves and disappearing before we got
indictments in the federal court. I cleaned that
out. And about that time... Federal FBI agents?
Yes. Oh, yeah. Oh, I worked very closely with them.
And my own CID, Criminal Investigations people
too, from Washington, I had asked to be
reinforced, unbeknownst to anybody, you know.
High quality, did you think the FBI was high
quality? Oh, absolutely, number one. Just
absolutely. I've always had the greatest
admiration for the
FBI. Now you get another assignment, another year
in Vietnam. I get seven days to get to Vietnam,
General Abrams says. Oh, is that how long? Were you
trying to get back? No, I was trying to spend
another year in Alaska after I'd cleaned this mess
up so I could go fishing. Get in a little fishing.
Did you have any time? Oh, hell, I only got one—
float trip of a couple of days, that's all I had.
Miss Hollingsworth, she enjoyed going down to
Seward Bay and where we had a camp, Army had a camp,
and catching silver salmon and that sort of stuff.
And I got a chance to go out one Sunday afternoon to
Iliamna and I got a big rainbow down there. I had
very little time for that. General Abrams called
you up and said, General, Chief of Staff of the Army
called me up and said, General Abrams wants you
over there right away in seven days. And I said,
hell, I've got to get Miss Hollingsworth home.
Well, you better get moving. So, my God, we just got
things stirred up, and I got Miss H back home, and
then I took off and got over there. And what had
happened there, we had a couple of disasters
up on the DMZ.
And Abrams wanted me back over there. They were
receiving a lot of criticism about drugs amongst
the soldiers. He had had a fifth The 5th Brigade,
separate brigade, 5th Independent Brigade that
was on the DMZ between North and South in a fire base
and they created themselves a mess hall and they
had all the guys in there eating and in comes a
rocket and kills a big part of the people. Total
violation of how to secure yourself and to allow
people to congregate in a place that's vulnerable
to attack. Murdered a bunch of people. Then they
had Mary Ann, Firebase Mary Ann, which is a part of
the old Mealy Division, the 23rd Division,
Marical Division, had the Mealy problems. Well,
they guys went to sleep in a fire base. Communists
overrun them, killed most of them. And Abrams, I
guess, thought that was the problem. We better get
the meanest son of a bitch in the world back over
here. That's why he called you? Yeah, yeah.
Meanest son of a bitch in the world back over here to
sort this out. Is that what he told you when he got
there? Yeah, yeah. He said, I want you to get up
there and get it sorted out. I said, well, I'll take
a look at it. He said, I don't want you looking at it.
I want you to sort it out.
Well, it had, deterioration had, you know,
nothing to do. The President of the United States
and the Secretary of Defense and all the high
moguls in Washington, plus all the Congress, I
went up north and you had 23rd Division up there and
101st Airborne Division. And this separate
brigade up there, bits and pieces of artillery
scattered here and there.
And I became the deputy commander as a major
general, deputy commander of the 24th Corps.
That's the emblem right there. This is what they
gave me when I lived up there. 24th Corps was
commanded by a hell of a fine guy. A nice guy. What
was his name? His name was, I'd rather not call his
name. He was just a nice guy. Nice guys don't win
ballgames. And he turned me loose. He said, I know
why you're here. He was a three star? Yeah, he was a
three star. You have the freedom of the run. Well, I
started sorting things out. I found a battery of
artillery that couldn't perform. Remember now we
were deactivating units and they were bringing
them home and that sort of stuff. I found a battery
of artillery that was so hopped up on drugs that
rather than try to train it, I just deactivated it
in place. Took all the people away, sent them home,
and deactivated it right there in the spot. That
bad off. That bad off. They couldn't have fired
around in any direction anywhere. Marijuana?
Marijuana. So, uh, I got very tough with them. I
went into the 101st Division. I found rusty
weapons and fire bases and here the division
commander, I'd have the division commander and
the brigade commander and the battalion
commander and the whole sequence of command right
there and here I am looking at a rusty rifle in a fire
base and I said, inexcusable.
How's this guy gonna save his life with this thing
and he won't shoot? Well that's how lax things have
gotten. Well the only thing that saved us I guess
was the fact that you had to leave. In the meantime I
knew Giep up there from intelligence reports was
getting ready to pull off an onslaught As we left,
he was going to come in with all of his conventional
capability and not a
counterinsurgency role that he had been doing,
but now he's ready. He's got all the tanks and
equipment, T-54, T-55 tanks, artillery, air
defense weapons that the Soviets had sent him.
He's all set now to go conventional. against the
Vietnamization which was the Vietnamese plus a
handful of Americans left and he struck on the 30th
of March meantime here I am up there sorting things
out and we're sending people home sending people
home when Abrams relieves a major general who is
more or less a commander of the third Vietnamese
Corps just outside of Saigon.
Abrams relieves him and by God I get instructions
to go immediately so I go there immediately on the
15th of December. That relief came as a result of an
element of artillery on the Cambodian border
having a little conflict with a troop of cavalry,
U.S. Cavalry, the 1st Cavalry Division, and the
artillery soldiers got up and left their
artillery pieces because they were scheduled to
go home. The U.S. Army? Yeah, U.S. They got up and
left them, and here you are in the face of the enemy
on the Cambodian border, the artillery pieces
sitting there. So the cavalry was sent up to guard
the pieces, and they resented the hell out of that,
of course. Where did you find these soldiers? I
don't know whatever happened to them. But anyway,
that had happened and occurred and had been sorted
out, but then I guess General Abrams had decided
that that fellow needed to go home. He must have
been tired. Actually, generals don't get tired,
you know. So,
I go down there and take over that. I inherit a
three-star Third Vietnamese Corps commander
who had been one hell of a guy as a regimental
commander and as a division commander.
But I thought he was weak as hell as a corps
commander and he had been fighting the war for
twenty years and wounded seven or eight times and I
guess what happens to a man you finally reach a
point of no return and no end to what you've been
doing for twenty years and you just finally reach a
point where you're totally ineffective. As a
result of that I had to take over command of that
Vietnamese corps because he was so sick and so
frightened that he couldn't eat and he couldn't
sleep. So instead of me being— He was the
three-star Vietnamese general. Yeah, instead of
me being his advisor, I became the commander. I did
it all. And on the 30th of March, they assaulted Loc
Ninh with new forces. And then they moved to
Arnlock, a province capital, in a big rubber
plantation that was to become GEAP's
headquarters for control in the South. And they
were to take that by the 18th of April and set up
their new government down there. I refused to let
them have it. And I had one Vietnamese, part of one
Vietnamese division in there, plus some province
forces of total strength was 6,800. 6,800
Vietnamese? How many Americans? About six. About
six? Six Americans, yeah, advisors. And they took
on 49,000 starting on the 5th of April. And they
were totally surrounded. And you were in there? I
went in and out. By helicopter? By helicopter. And
that was under siege from the 5th of April until I
finally killed that formation the second time.
And Mr. Gieb decided that he no longer had an
offensive capability on the 18th of May. There was
continuous, sporadic action all around, but I had
totally destroyed his offensive capability. And
at that time, I had destroyed it twice. I destroyed
it first when he attacked with five divisions.
Tell me about this. Well, they had five divisions
that attacked 360 degrees around these guys, plus
one artillery division. which they'd brought in,
and the artillery division beat to pieces all the
Vietnamese artillery inside and destroyed the
whole place of An Loc, a beautiful French
province, you know, town headquarters, red tile
roofs and all that sort of stuff. Very French,
modern place. It was a province headquarters with
20,000 people in it.
They destroyed that, a large share of it. They were
supposed to have that on the 18th. The 9th VC
Division, those that we captured and killed of
that division, had a clean uniform in his pack and
they were going to be the parade forces on the 18th
of April when they set up their new government and
took over the South. Well, with the use of B-52s and
TAC air, and some helicopter gunship. And by the
use of C-130s, I was able to keep ammunition
supplies going in there. And at the end of the first
battle, which was over about the 16th or 17th,
they were unable to attack me again until the 10th
of May, at which time they brought down 40,000 more
replacements plus 135 tanks, T-55 tanks.
At that time I counted my strength and I was down to
about 3,000.
That included wounded because the Vietnamese
refused to go in and take all these helicopters
we'd give them and train them with for the last
eight years, refused to go in and evacuate their
own wounded. Really? The South Vietnamese? The
South Vietnamese refused to go in and back their
own wounded. Why was that? Because they'd get the
hell shot out of them. And the other thing is they
lost total control of their people and when they'd
get a helicopter in there you had only about two
seconds to sit down, load up, and get out before the
incoming rockets and artillery. The high day of
rocket incoming fire on those forces was 5,800
rounds in a 24-hour period, which we think, for the
density that we held on the 10th of May, we only had
100,000
meters by 2,000 meters. That's all we had. That was
all that was left at Onlon. We had that. with
probably 2,800 people, some of them afraid to
shoot their weapons because they knew that if they
were wounded, there was no medical capability.
And they knew that their own people wouldn't
evacuate them. And I was told that I could not
afford to have any casualties because
Vietnamization is working. And I knew goddamn
well how well Vietnamization was working because
here I am in command of all 14 provinces plus all the
regional forces and the popular forces in all the
villages plus the five-division Vietnamese
capability against now in the total and final
analysis about 67 divisions of North Vietnamese
around An Long. And I'm catching hell from
everybody. And bad press. And... Why bad press?
Well, press, for example, one time... During this
battle? Yeah, during the whole damn campaign,
during April and May. Well, one time I landed on the
road, Highway 13, which had been cut off and
blocked, which is our supply route in there, which
caused no ground element supply at all. It had to
all be by air, air droppable.
I was, I was standing out there and the BBC, I looked
around and somebody had a microphone stuck
between the legs. Well, General, what are you
going to do today? Have you lost on lock? I said,
hell no, I haven't lost on lock. And he said, well,
what are you going to do today? I said, I'm going to
kill every one of these bastards before they get
back into Cambodia.
And Jesus God, first thing I know, the Secretary of
Defense, old Hubert Humphrey, who was a leftist
son of a bitch, and a goddamn Catholic Priest in
Washington saying, you ought to relieve that guy.
He's trying to kill his enemy.
Can you imagine that? Well, Abrams come out and he
said, God damn it, you have to talk to the press. I
said, no, I don't have to talk to the press. I avoid
the goddamn press. But when some son of a bitch
sticks a microphone up between my legs, next time
I'm going to shoot him. He said, Jesus Christ, I'd
rather you talk to him than shoot him.
One or another is bad enough. Well, you know, you
know, goddamned
anti-American bastards in America or something
else. Anyway...
We went ahead and won that damn battle. What about
the second siege? Oh, second siege, the second go
at it. You were telling me about the buildup. Well,
they got them all back together, and we started
getting pressure on the 10th. So I went out to see
General Abrams.
He said, can you hold it? I said, well, if I get
enough firepower, I can. I said, I don't have any
troops hardly left the town. I said, I got it.
Somehow or another, I got to get them to hold. If I
can just get them to hold, I'll kill the rest of the
bastards myself. But I've got to get them to hold.
He said, well, I got 125 sorties a day of B-52s. He
said, I've been thinking about giving all of them
to you one day and then give them the next area over
in fuel up in the second core area of Viet Cong up in
the hill country some help the next day and then up
on the DMZ in the first core area in Da Nang area the
next day and I said well god damn it if you do that it
means three and I'll get them all tomorrow and then
when I need them the next day they're out their
B-52s are gone somewhere else I said I'm not so sure
that I can stand that But I said, by God, I'll accept
that if you'll give them to me when I want them. He
said, well, when do you think you're going to be
attacked? I said, I think I'm going to be attacked
at 5.30 on the morning of the 11th. He said, why do
you say that? I said, because of the buildup and the
pressures I'm getting all around the perimeter,
tank movements and that sort of stuff. And I said,
if you could give them all to me then, over a 30-hour
period,
plus a Kitty Hawk and a Hancock, plus the 7th Air
Force.
Meantime, the president has sent Alexander Haig
and Henry Kissinger over. Alexander Haig comes
under president and wants to know from you
personally, can you hold it? That's what Haig
asked you? Yeah, he said, the president wanted me
to ask you personally, and I have to pass the
president. I said, I don't know. You'd like a beer?
Yeah. Beer. Thank you. So,
I said, I don't know, Al. I said, God damn it, if I can
get some damn firepower here to support it, I said,
I think I can.
He said, well, the president's going to give you a
third star if you can do it. Really? That's what
Hank said to you right there on the spot? That's
what Hank said to me. I said, I'm not interested in
any goddamn third star. I said,
I'll see what the hell I can do here. I've got to have
the damn firepower.
I had four battalions of infantry left in the 3rd
Brigade of the 1st Cavalry Division. and a handful
of helicopters. And I wasn't permitted to use
these infantrymen. So Abrams comes out— They were
Americans. Americans, yeah. Everybody else had
gone home, except a hell of a big lot of
headquarters, about 30,000 civilians and
military left in headquarters there. And that's
the reason why they didn't want the damn high
command captured.
Remember, they had gotten into Saigon with a hell
of a lot less strength in 1968. But I had no goddamn
strength at all. I wasn't going to allow the son of a
bitch that's in there. So, well, Abrams comes out
to see me, and he said... He flew out? Yeah, in his
helicopter, he came out to see me from his
headquarters down in Saigon. He said, Secretary
of Defense and the President wants to continue
withdrawal
of forces, drawdown.
He said, and you want more air power? I said, yeah.
He said, what will you trade for a Marine Air Group?
I said, I'll trade you two battalions of infantry,
but those guys are out there protecting the rocket
belt to keep rockets from falling on your head down
there. And I said, I don't think you're going to get
any. I think all those rocket forces are all up
around me at Unlock. You haven't had any rounds in
on you recently. I said, I'll trade you two
battalions of infantry for a Marine air wing. He
said, well, hell, there's only 900 people in that
Marine air wing. I said, yeah, I don't give a damn
how many people we got. I just want the damn
airplanes. 36 airplanes, or 24, 20. Yeah, about 36
airplanes. A-4s, A-4s. So, that was the 12th
Marine Air Group. So, commanded by Colonel Dan
Mocko, who should have been a Marine Brigadier,
but never was, and retired as a colonel. God damn,
what a phenomenal guy. Anyway,
he said, well, by God, I want you.